In each of the parts of this symposium,
the speaker will help us to see
not only the wonder of creation
but also the thunder of creation.
We will hear Jehovah’s words
like thunder—loud and clear.
Please find Nehemiah 9:6 with me,
and notice the faith-strengthening effect
that creation has on the angels above.
Nehemiah 9:6:
“You alone are Jehovah;
“you made the heavens,
yes, the heaven of the heavens
“and all their army,
the earth and all that is on it,
“the seas and all that is in them.
“And you preserve all of them alive,
and the army of the heavens
are bowing down to you.”
Well, that verse
extols Jehovah as the Creator.
But did you notice the expression
“the heaven of the heavens”?
What is that?
Well, that refers to the complete extent
of the physical heavens
—the atmospheric heavens,
the heavens of outer space.
And at the top
of the heavens’ outer space, that rim,
that is the heaven of the heavens
—the highest heavens.
Now, when we look at the heavens,
what do we see?
What do we feel?
Well, in that verse,
did you notice it mentions (first time)
“the heavens and all their army”?
That’s referring
to the physical army of the heavens
—the stars, the planets, the galaxies.
But did you notice in the last sentence
that there is another “army of the heavens”?
And that refers to the holy angels of God.
And just contemplating the physical creation,
the angels are moved
to bow down or worship Jehovah.
Contemplating the creation
can have a similar effect on us.
Now, each talk of this symposium will discuss
how meditating on an aspect of creation
will build our faith in Jehovah’s promises.
Let’s watch a video about the stars,
and then we will have
a faith-strengthening application
to our resurrection hope.
Our sun is considered an average star.
Yet, the energy from the sun
that reaches the earth is thousands of times
the world’s total energy use.
With our unaided eyes,
we might see about 3,000 stars
on a dark night
—many in a fuzzy band.
The Milky Way galaxy
is where our sun
is just one of perhaps
200 to 400 billion stars.
Astronomers think the Milky Way galaxy
is clustered together
with around 100,000 large galaxies
in a massive structure called a supercluster
that together with an estimated
two trillion galaxies
make up the known physical universe.
Countless stars
spread over unfathomable distances,
releasing immense amounts of energy
may be impossible to grasp for us
—but not for Jehovah.
“He counts the number of the stars;
“he calls all of them by name.
Our Lord is great and is mighty in power.”
In just a two-minute video about the stars,
we see the awesome wonder,
but do we hear the thunder?
Do we hear the clear, undeniable application
from Jehovah, our Creator?
Well, I invite you
to turn with me to Isaiah 40:26, please.
What can we come to appreciate about Jehovah
by pondering the magnitude
and the magnificence of the stars?
Well, at Isaiah 40:26,
Jehovah says to look at the stars.
He says:
“Lift up your eyes to heaven and see.
“Who has created these things [the wonder]?
“It is the One who brings
out their army by number;
“he calls them all by name.
“Because of his vast dynamic energy
and his awe-inspiring power,
not one of them is missing.”
Well, in the video we saw,
it estimated that there are
two trillion galaxies in outer space,
each with billions of stars.
So do the math.
How many names of inanimate objects
does Jehovah have in his memory?
How many can he possibly contain?
But did you notice
that at the end of that verse,
it says that “not one of them are missing”?
It is said that there are
a billion, trillion stars.
So I have to ask you,
“Would Jehovah remember your name?
your loved one’s name?”
“Not one of them is missing.”
Not one star goes missing to Jehovah.
Well, how about our dead loved ones?
Did they go missing?
My favorite verses
when a faithful servant of Jehovah dies
are Romans 14:7-9.
In verse 8, it says:
“If we live
“[or] if we die,
we belong to Jehovah.”
The status with Jehovah
does not change at death.
That person did not go missing.
But what about those of us
who have loved ones
who at the time of their death,
they had not come to learn
about or put faith in Jehovah?
What about that?
Well, think about this:
If Jehovah had the ability, the power,
to create those huge stars and galaxies,
he can recreate all
—all—those sleeping in the memorial tombs.
Find John 5:28, 29.
Let’s verify that so that all of us,
whether the dead loved one
was previously a faithful Witness or not,
all of us, can entertain
the hope of the resurrection.
John 5:28, 29:
“Do not be amazed at this,
“for the hour is coming in which all
“[all] those in the memorial tombs
will hear his voice and come out,
“those who did good things
to a resurrection of life,
“and those who practiced
[you see, even] vile things
to a resurrection of judgment.”
Yes, they’ll be restored to life
and they’ll have the opportunity
to come to love the One who gifted them
with the miracle of a resurrection.
Now, in our video,
right at the end (on screen),
there was a quotation of Psalm 147:4, 5.
And in verse 4, it says
that ‘Jehovah counts all the stars’
—the billions, trillions, or more of them.
It says that he named each one
—the billions or trillions of them.
That is amazing indeed.
But we’d like to learn
another lesson from the book of Job.
In Job 14, please,
we’re going to read verses 13 and 15.
When a star burns out,
it does not go missing to Jehovah.
No doubt he remembers its name,
but he is not motivated to resurrect
that star back to light
so that it can again
twinkle in a dark night sky.
But what about humans?
We were created in the image
of Jehovah God and his Son, Christ Jesus.
At Job 14:13,
Job says:
“O that in the Grave you would conceal me,
“that you would hide me
until your anger passes by,
that you would set a time limit
for me and remember me!”
And in verse 14, it’s obviously
talking about the resurrection.
But would Job, in effect,
just become a burned-out star?
No.
Unlike a burned-out star,
Jehovah yearns—he longs—to call back
each human to life
so that we can again see
that starlike twinkle in their eyes.
And now verse 15:
“You [that’s Jehovah] will call,
and I will answer you.”
You see, from the grave, “I will answer you.”
“You will long for the work of your hands.”
But Jehovah has the memory
to bring back people.
He has the power to bring back people,
and he has the longing
to bring back people to life.
Friends, observe the stars.
Have faith that you will see
your resurrected loved ones.
And now, Brother Patrick LaFranca,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will continue this symposium with his talk,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith—Oceans.”